JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Floating wreckage
proves EgyptAir Flight 804
crashed in the
Mediterranean, but there remain
more questions
than answers as to what brought
down the plane.
Also ahead: Food labels are
about to get a
makeover. The first lady and the
FDA overhaul
rules to include added sugar and
other changes
to promote healthier eating.
Then: The candidates talk
foreign policy,
as worries rise about party
unity. Mark Shields
and David Brooks take on that
and more of
the week's news.
And ahead of President Obama's
trip to Vietnam,
a look at how the U.S.
ambassador to the country
is doing away with traditional
modes of diplomacy
and jumping into the culture.
TED OSIUS, U.S. Ambassador to
Vietnam: The
fact that I show respect for
Vietnamese language
and culture and history, the
Vietnamese people,
the fact that I show that
respect, that I
clearly enjoy being here, I
think that has
helped my mission.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: They have found
some of what's
left of EgyptAir Flight 804, and
new clues
may be emerging in the
investigation. The
passenger plane vanished from
the radar early
yesterday, en route from Paris
to Cairo, with
66 people on board.
John Yang reports on the day's
developments.
JOHN YANG: At a Cairo mosque,
families of
passengers aboard EgyptAir
Flight 804 prayed,
and wept, for loved ones.
ABDEL RAHMAN AL NASERY, Cousin
of Passenger
(through translator): He was my
cousin. He
was like an elder brother to me.
This is very
hard for the family, and God
bless all who
died on the plane.
JOHN YANG: Their hopes dashed by
the discovery
of wreckage from the Airbus
A-320 announced
on Egyptian state television.
WOMAN (through translator): We
have just received
an official report from the
Egyptian army.
Military airplanes have been
able to locate
wreckage and belongings of the
airplane.
JOHN YANG: The Greek defense
minister recounted
the grisly details.
PANOS KAMMENOS, Greek Defense
Minister (through
translator): We have been
briefed about the
discovery of a body part, two
seats and luggage
at the scene of the search,
slightly to the
south of where the plane's
signal was lost.
JOHN YANG: A European satellite
image showed
an oil slick spreading over the
area where
the plane disappeared. Debris
was spotted
floating in the Mediterranean
about 180 miles
north of Alexandria, Egypt. It's
an area were
the sea is up to two miles'
deep, but still
no firm evidence of what
happened.
Late today, what could be a
significant clue:
The Aviation Herald, an online
aviation community,
reported that an automated
monitoring system
on the plane sent signals
indicating smoke
in the front of the cabin and
then failures
of two key control systems
before going silent.
Egyptian officials had initially
suggested
a terror attack as the likeliest
explanation,
but the Greek defense minister
said today
it's just too early to tell.
PANOS KAMMENOS (through
translator): There
is no possibility to assess the
situation.
We cannot be part of the
speculation, because
the investigation committee must
be allowed
to do its work.
JOHN YANG: The French navy is
helping scour
the sea, and its investigators
said no possible
causes are being ruled out.
JEAN-MARC AYRAULT, French
Minister of Foreign
Affairs (through translator):
All hypotheses
are being examined. There is no
specific one
being favored. We have to find
the debris
and analyze it, and of course
the black boxes,
because we want to know the
truth, the whole
truth.
JOHN YANG: So far, there's no
hard evidence
of an explosion. But from Cairo
to Paris and
beyond, speculation centers on
terrorism.
STEVEN SIMON, Dartmouth College:
They can't
pretend that it wasn't or
completely suspend
judgment. They have to check the
locks.
JOHN YANG: Steven Simon served
on President
Obama's National Security
Council. He says
officials have to investigate it
as a possible
terror attacks.
STEVEN SIMON: They will look to
see if any
of the identities of any of the
people on
the airplane, the crew, the
maintenance team,
anybody who had anything to do
with that airplane
while it was on the ground in
Paris, they
will just go through, you know,
those records
with a fine-tooth comb, looking
for dots to
connect, if indeed there are
any.
JOHN YANG: At the same time, he
says, Europe
has to work on beefing up
counterterrorism
efforts.
STEVEN SIMON: It's sort of a
cumulative process.
You can't throw a lot of money
at something
and expect radical changes in
six months.
This is going to be a
transformative process
in the European context which
will take a
while to complete.
JOHN YANG: As the search for
what, or perhaps
who, brought down Flight 804
presses ahead.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So far, there's
been no claim
by any outside group that it had
a hand in
bringing down the plane.
Here to talk through some of the
many questions
still out there is our science
correspondent
and aviation analyst, Miles
O'Brien.
Miles, first, this automated
data that became
known this afternoon, what do
you make of
that?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, just a
quick bit of background
for our viewers.
This is -- as an aircraft flies
around, it's
essentially live-streaming its
condition,
its health of various systems.
It's mostly
for maintenance, so when the
plane lands,
they know what parts to have
ready and what
to fix it to get it back in the
air again.
There were a series of faults
apparently right
before the plane disappeared
from radar, beginning
with some problems with the
windshield in
the cockpit, smoke in the
lavatory and in
the avionics bay, which is
beneath the cockpit,
and then some failures of the
computer systems.
There are literally hundreds of
computer systems
controlling this aircraft. They
all have to
operate in concert. This is
certainly consistent
with a catastrophic event.
Whether it is a
bomb or some major mechanical
failure remains
to be seen. It also is
consistent with that
initial left turn reported on
Greek radar.
The plane took a 90-degree left
turn initially
when it apparently was in
trouble, and that
is standard operating procedure
for a flight
crew dealing with a
decompression event and
trying to do a rapid descent.
The idea is not to fly into the
airway beneath
you and potentially hit oncoming
traffic.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, this is -- in
other words,
you're saying this is consistent
with the
little bit, the little that's
known about
what the plane did before it
plunged into
the water?
MILES O'BRIEN: It is consistent
with a crew
dealing with a rapid
decompression.
The cause of that rapid
decompression, we
don't know. Was it a bomb or was
it a major
mechanical failure are the open
questions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Miles, what about
the material
they found floating in the
water? They said
two seats, a body part and some
other luggage
and so forth. Do we know
anything based on
that?
MILES O'BRIEN: It's a reminder,
of course,
of the human tragedy of all
this.
But it's customary in these
cases that you
see seat cushions and life vests
and baggage
because it -- obviously, it
floats. Typically,
it's not very helpful unless, by
some chance,
the baggage happened to be close
to where
the initial failure occurred.
What's useful, however, is
knowing where it
is, knowing the ocean currents,
knowing how
long it's been in the water. You
can backtrack
to the point of impact. And
that's where you
begin your search for the main
body of wreckage
and the black boxes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, we heard in
John Yang's
report that that part of the
Mediterranean
is something like two miles'
deep. What does
that tell us about the
difficulty of this
ongoing search?
MILES O'BRIEN: That it is
difficult. It's
a big challenge, fishing these
boxes out.
We go through this time and
again. There is
technology off the shelf used by
the military
right now which has ejectable,
floatable,
deployable flight data
recorders. There is
technology which makes it
possible to stream
this data back in real time, not
unlike the
stream that we have just been
talking about.
In the 21st century, the fact
that we have
to listen for pings two miles
beneath the
surface of the ocean to find out
a critical
question -- the answer to a
critical question
is a bit scandalous. We should
do something
about it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Miles, a lot
of people
are saying now that we need to
assume there
was terrorism involved. Does it
make sense
to do that, in the absence of a
hard answer
right now?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, I think we
-- I would
caution our viewers.
If, in fact, there was some sort
of mechanical
failure here, that's a very
important thing
to know as soon as possible.
This is a fleet
of aircraft in excess of 6,000
the world over.
It's an extreme -- it's a
workhorse, and if
there is some fundamental flaw
here which
caused this, we need to know
about it yesterday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you're saying
-- but are
we any closer? You're saying
it's just coming
very slowly as we get any closer
to answers.
MILES O'BRIEN: You know, absent
a claim of
credit -- and we haven't seen
that just yet
-- we're in the dark on this,
and it's -- you
know, eventually, maybe a piece
of fleeting
wreckage will offer a clue as to
whether there
was a bomb on board, but I'm
afraid we are
going to have to wait for those
black boxes,
the flight data recorder and
cockpit voice
recorder, to be discovered at
the bottom of
the sea.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, in the
meantime, hold
off on any assumptions?
MILES O'BRIEN: I think so.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Miles O'Brien, we
thank you.
MILES O'BRIEN: You're welcome,
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: Health
officials reported the number of
pregnant
women in the U.S. infected with
the Zika virus
has tripled, to 157.
The Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention
said that it's now including all
women who
test positive, regardless of
symptoms. So
far, fewer than a dozen have had
miscarriages
or babies born with birth
defects.
Meanwhile, President Obama got a
briefing
on Zika today, and he urged
Congress to get
moving to provide funds.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Understand that this is not
something where
we can build a wall to prevent.
Mosquitoes
don't go through customs. To the
extent that
we're not handling this thing on
the front
end, we're going to have bigger
problems on
the back end.
So, for those of you who are
listening, tell
your members of Congress, get on
the job on
this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. Senate
has passed
a $1.1 billion bill to fight the
virus. A
House-passed bill totals just
over half that,
$622 million.
A shooting near the White House
put the executive
mansion on lockdown for a time
today. Federal
law enforcement officials say a
uniformed
Secret Service officer shot a
man who drew
a gun. He was taken to a
hospital in critical
condition. President Obama
wasn't at the White
House at the time.
In Iraq, Baghdad is under a
curfew tonight
after protesters stormed the
Green Zone and
security forces fired tear gas
and gunshots.
Dozens were wounded, with at
least one person
shot in the head. It was the
second time in
three weeks that protesters had
broken into
the heavily fortified zone.
Meanwhile, Iraqi
troops retook the western town
of Rutba, allowing
the main road from Amman to
Baghdad to be
reopened.
Political turmoil shook Israel
today and deepened
divisions in the ruling Cabinet.
Defense Minister
Moshe Ya'alon abruptly resigned,
removing
one of the government's last
moderate voices.
He said he no longer trusts
Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu and his
hard-line supporters.
MOSHE YA'ALON, Israeli Defense
Minister (through
translator): In all my
positions, I worked
in harmony and in a serious way.
But, to my
great dismay, extremist and
dangerous elements
have taken over Israel and the
Likud Party,
and are shaking the house and
threatening
to hurt its inhabitants. This is
not the Likud
Party I joined.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ya'alon warned
that racism
and violence is seeping into the
Israeli army
and doing it damage. Prime
Minister Netanyahu
said that he regretted the
resignation. It's
been reported that he plans to
name hard-line
former Foreign Minister Avigdor
Lieberman
as the new defense minister.
In Turkey, the Parliament voted
today to strip
lawmakers of their immunity from
prosecution.
Pro-Kurdish legislators charged
that the goal
is to prosecute them for
allegedly supporting
outlawed Kurdish rebels. It is
the latest
move against political opponents
of the Turkish
government.
A new president has taken office
in Taiwan.
Tsai Ing-wen's political party
supports formal
independence from China. But
after a swearing-in
ceremony at the presidential
building in Taipei,
she chose her words carefully.
TSAI ING-WEN, Taiwanese
President (through
translator): The new government
will conduct
cross-strait affairs in
accordance with relevant
legislation. The two governing
parties across
the strait must set aside the
baggage of history,
and engage in positive dialogue,
for the benefit
of the people on both sides.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tsai is the first
woman to
serve as president of Taiwan.
Another wave of heavy rain added
to the misery
in Sri Lanka today. Flooding in
the capital,
Colombo, has displaced more than
185,000 people.
Today, trucks plowed through the
water to
ferry out evacuees. Helicopters
were sent
in to rescue others from their
rooftops. The
rain also triggered mudslides
this week, and
hundreds of people are still
missing.
India has set a record for its
hottest temperature
ever, nearly 124 degrees
Fahrenheit. It happened
today in the western city of
Phalodi, as authorities
issued a severe heat alert for
several states,
and called in emergency water
supplies.
MAN (through translator): Today,
we are facing
a very difficult situation.
There is heavy
traffic, and large quantities of
water are
being consumed from the big
water tankers.
People are drinking a lot of
water, and the
demand is still rising. We have
to fill up
this tank at least three to four
times a day.
JUDY WOODRUFF: India's heat is
always worst
in April, May and June, before
monsoon rains
bring relief. Hundreds of people
have died
this week, and thousands of
farmers have lost
their crops.
Back in this country, Oklahoma
Governor Mary
Fallin vetoed a bill that makes
it a felony
for doctors to perform an
abortion. Her fellow
Republicans pushed through the
measure yesterday.
It would have been the first law
of its kind
in the country.
San Francisco's police chief,
Greg Suhr, has
been forced out, after a series
of police
killings of unarmed minorities.
The latest
came yesterday, when officers
shot dead a
black woman in a stolen car.
Suhr was also
criticized for not acting faster
against police
who sent racist text messages.
Deputy Chief
Toney Chaplin will take over on
an interim
basis.
Wall Street ended the week with
a modest rally.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 65
points to close above 17500. The
Nasdaq rose
57, and the S&P 500 added 12.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
revamped
nutrition labels aim to kick our
sugar habit;
Mark Shields and David Brooks
analyze this
week's news; thawing relations
ahead of the
president's visit to Vietnam;
and much more.
The labels on the food we buy
will be getting
a new look. The Food and Drug
Administration
rolled out rules today with a
greater emphasis
on displaying clearly how much
added sugar
is in the foods we eat.
Here's William Brangham.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The changes to
these food
labels won't go into effect
until later this
summer, but here's what you will
see when
you go to the store.
On the left is the label we all
see today.
On the right is the new one. The
first thing
that jumps out is that the
calories are going
to be displayed much more
prominently. But
the bigger change is further
down. A new line
is being added showing how many
grams of added
sugars have been put into the
food beyond
what was there already.
And the label will also tell you
the percentage
of the recommended daily amount
of sugar that
is taken up with these added
sugars.
So what does this all mean and
will it make
any difference?
Allison Aubrey of National
Public Radio is
here to help us sort it out.
Welcome, Allison.
ALLISON AUBREY, National Public
Radio: Hi,
William. Good to be here.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Thanks.
I have heard these rules
described as radical
and wrongheaded by some people
and as a huge
leap forward for the positive by
others. As
a reporter who has covered a lot
of this,
where do you come down on that?
ALLISON AUBREY: I wouldn't say
this is radical.
I would say that this reflects
the evolved
science, that this is incredibly
well-grounded
in science. It's very clear now,
many studies
showing that excess sugar leads
to not only
weight gain, but also higher
risk of heart
disease.
I would say the only thing that
is surprising
here is that the food and
beverage industry
really didn't get its way.
Public health won
out.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That's not a
terribly common
thing these days.
ALLISON AUBREY: Not at all. Not
at all.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, what is
the FDA hoping
for here? Are they trying to
create some sense
of sticker shock, that people
will go into
the store, pull some product off
the shelf
and say, whoa, I didn't realize
there was
that much added sugar, and then
now maybe
make a different choice? Is that
goal here?
ALLISON AUBREY: You know, maybe
sticker shock
in the beginning, but here's
what I think
is at play.
I think the label is a lot
simpler. Right?
So, gone are all these
recommendations about
how much Vitamin A and Vitamin C
you're getting
in the product. What's really
amplified, as
we just saw on the label you
pointed out,
are calories. Calories are still
a big deal.
It's not a perfect way to figure
out what
to eat, but it's a very clear
and easy way
to figure out how much you're
getting. And
calories still matter.
The other thing, as you pointed
out, the sugar
thing is just absolutely huge.
And the added
sugar thing is really important.
Let me just
give you an example.
So, if you were to take a
20-ounce sugary
soda, that has 65 grams of
sugar. That's 16
teaspoons of sugar.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Wow.
ALLISON AUBREY: Now you're going
to see that
on the label.
What you're also going to see
is, it's going
to say, this product contains
130 percent
of the sugar you're supposed to
be eating
in a day. In other words, this
is more sugar
than you're supposed to be
eating in a day.
That's really what they're
trying to communicate
here.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, that is
sticker shock.
ALLISON AUBREY: It will be at
first for many
people, because I think people
are largely
unaware.
Look, nobody's taking their
coffee cup and
putting 12 teaspoons of sugar in
it. But where
we're getting a lot of the sugar
is the added
sugar that is hidden in foods,
so, yogurts,
oatmeal, cereals, all kinds of
processed foods,
lots and lots of hidden sugars.
And this is
just going to make it easier to
see how much
is there.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: What does
science tell us
about what changes people's
behaviors? I'm
just curious, do you think this
is actually
going to work to steer people to
healthier
choices?
ALLISON AUBREY: Well, I think
the very first
thing you have to do to change
behavior is
to give people good information,
right? So,
that's the number one step.
And that's really the goal here.
I mean, 20
years ago, people weren't really
reading these
food labels. The USDA has data
showing that
a lot of people, an increased
number, a significant
number of people are now reading
the food
labels.
So, the idea is better
information, that's
at least the first step to
behavior change.
And then you need the people
around you to
support you. I think that also
gets into the
role of powerful people
promoting this. Of
course, the first lady has been
talking about
this nonstop during her years in
the White
House, and that has made a big
difference.
She has really used her platform
and really
used her megaphone to raise
awareness about
these issues and bring attention
to them.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The grocery
industry somewhat
made its peace with this, but
the sugar industry,
as you might imagine, has not.
They said that the FDA is --
quote -- "setting
a precedent that is not grounded
in science."
What is the industry's beef with
this, so
to speak?
ALLISON AUBREY: Yes, I should
point out by
saying, like, almost every
nutrition scientist
would disagree with that fact.
And the bottom line is that
they're already
making changes. The food
industry has seen
the writing on the wall for a
while. I mean,
the World Health Organization,
the American
Heart Association for years now
has been saying
we need to cut back on sugar.
Only recently
did we work this into the
dietary guidelines.
The writing has been on the
wall. The industry
is already making changes. You
will see yogurts
frequently now in the grocery
store, not just
the premium and high-end brands,
but the everyday
brands saying this product has
25 percent
less sugar now. So the industry
knows how
to adapt, and, ultimately, they
will.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Allison Aubrey
of National Public Radio, thank
you very much.
ALLISON AUBREY: Thanks, William.
Great to
be here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now we turn
to the presidential
campaign, where the party
front-runners have
been trading barbs this week,
among other
things, on foreign policy.
During a CNN interview Thursday,
Hillary Clinton
criticized Donald Trump's
handling of issues,
saying Trump is not qualified to
be president.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Whether it's attacking Great
Britain, praising
the leader of North Korea, a
despotic dictator
who has nuclear weapons, whether
it is saying
pull out of NATO, let other
countries have
nuclear weapons, the kinds of
positions he
is stating and the consequences
of those positions
and even the consequences of his
statements
are not just offensive to
people. They are
potentially dangerous.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Trump shot back
Thursday night
at a fund-raiser for New Jersey
Governor Chris
Christie.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Today, we had a terrible
tragedy. And she
came up and she said that Donald
Trump talked
about radical Islamic terrorism,
which she
doesn't want to use. She used a
different
term.
And I'm saying to myself, what
just happened
about 12 hours ago? A plane got
blown out
of the sky. And if anything --
if anybody
thinks it wasn't blown out of
the sky, you're
100 percent wrong, folks, OK?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And then, today,
there was
more tough talk at the National
Rifle Association's
annual convention in Louisville.
Trump brought
up the mass shooting in San
Bernardino last
year.
DONALD TRUMP: If we had guns on
the other
side, it wouldn't have been that
way. I would've
-- boom.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: If we had guns on
the other
side, it wouldn't have been that
way.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: And then you have
the gun-free
zones, gun-free zones. We're
getting rid of
gun-free zones, OK, I can tell
you.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Trump, who has
previously supported
some gun restrictions, received
the NRA's
endorsement today.
Hillary Clinton, meantime, was
off the campaign
trail today, while her opponent,
Bernie Sanders,
stumped in New Mexico.
And that all brings us to the
analysis of
Shields and Brooks. That's
syndicated columnist
Mark Shields and New York Times
columnist
David Brooks.
It's great to have you both.
Thank you for
being here.
So, David, Donald Trump wins the
endorsement
of the National Rifle
Association. Not a surprise.
What does it mean for him?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, he's
beginning to get
the lay-down from the Republican
base.
What's happening is -- I have
had so many
conversations this week, the
last couple of
weeks -- he's becoming
normalized. A lot of
people who a week ago thought he
was the biggest
monster since -- coming out of
the swamps,
now think, well, you know, he's
a little more
conservative than I would -- or
less conservative
than I would like, but I think
we can educate
him, we can bring him along.
So, now he's just a normal
candidate. And
that's part of the general
lay-down in front
of him. And he has got to be
thinking, man,
this is easy. But it's -- it's
pretty much
happening, not across the board.
A lot of
people are just laying low, but
he's gathering
the base.
And the one thing that I think
was a misstep
was, he listed his Supreme Court
choices this
week.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: And, to me, his
fall campaign
is not about winning over the
Ted Cruz people.
It's about getting all the
disaffected people
across the ideological spectrum,
including
potentially some Sanders
disaffected people.
And so making him on social
issues and on
court issues a very traditional
orthodox conservative,
seems to me, scares away a lot
of people who
are really his potential in the
fall.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see,
Mark, what
he's doing?
I mean, he's appealing to the
NRA, saying,
we're not going to have any more
gun-free
zones, and then this -- this --
what David
brings up, trotting out the
names of 11 judges
who he says are potential for
the Supreme
Court if he's elected.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, I just see
this on the
part of Trump -- the judges, I
see it a little
bit differently. That is, just
he's reaching
out to the base. He's trying to
reassure them,
look, you know, I'm OK.
And it's providing cover to
them. Hey, look
-- you know, they don't want to
support him.
They have got doubts about him.
They're afraid
of what he might do by Columbus
Day or Labor
Day, to the point where he not
only embarrasses
and hurts Republicans, but
embarrasses and
hurts them for having endorsed
him or stood
with him.
So he's just kind of providing
cover: Well,
he was going to give us the
right kind of
judges.
The gun-free zones I mean, this
is a man of
enormous flexibility. He didn't
just say that
he was for an assault weapons
ban. He wrote
it in a book. When you write it
in a book,
it's something -- it's just not
off the cuff.
And now he's totally changed his
position
on that.
The gun-free zones, Judy, to me,
it's just
-- it's irrational, that somehow
packing heat,
bringing a concealed weapon into
an elementary
school area or on a campus is
going to increase
personal safety.
That absolutely bizarre, boom,
at San Bernardino
-- he can't leave San
Bernardino, for good
reason. It was a political
masterstroke on
his part. I mean, San
Bernardino, the tragedy
that happened, the mass murder,
what did he
say after? I'm for banning
Muslims of any
kind from coming into the United
States.
And what did it do? It was a 2-1
approval
among Republican voters. And his
numbers went
up. So, I mean, he's going to
play that card,
and that's what he's doing.
DAVID BROOKS: There's a couple
of other things
going on here.
One is just the -- like, does
the president
have power to end all gun-free
zones around
schools? School -- there is a
federal law
that George W. -- H.W. Bush
passed.
MARK SHIELDS: That's right.
DAVID BROOKS: But the schools --
the localities
and the states have some say in
all this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right. Right.
DAVID BROOKS: And so he does --
he doesn't
really have the power.
It's like a symbolic issue. So
much is symbolic.
Even his reaction to the
airplane that crashed,
he -- in narcissistic fashion,
frankly, he
chose the reality that was
useful for him
at that moment. And reality
bends around him.
And so we don't know what
happened to that
plane. But he said -- and then
we just saw
that clip -- if you disagree
with me on this
unknown thing, you're 100
percent wrong. And
that's the reality force field
that he creates
around himself.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But he seems --
as Mark was
saying -- and I guess you're
both making this
point -- he seems to be able to
say whatever
he believes at that moment, but
then to say
something different later.
And is he being held accountable
by the voters?
Or are his people just so
enamored of what
they're hearing and what they're
seeing, Mark,
that it doesn't really matter
what he says?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, I think the
National Rifle
Association would have endorsed
a ham sandwich
against Hillary Clinton.
I mean, he could have got up and
said anything.
This is -- his past positions
mean nothing.
They were going to endorse him.
And his past
positions mean nothing to him. I
think the
man could pass a polygraph. I
mean, he has
already done this on Libya.
Just now it turns out that his
position on
Libya, where he's criticized
Secretary Clinton
for the United States toppling
-- or being
involved in the toppling of
Gadhafi, and then
leaving the country to its own
resources,
which proved sad and inadequate,
that this
was a tragedy, now it turns out
that Donald
Trump was all for going into
Libya, for bringing
full force.
Now, I think this is a
cumulative thing. And
maybe it doesn't matter in the
primary. I
think, when you're talking about
a crisis,
a national crisis -- and every
campaign has
them -- we had it in October in
2008 with
the financial crisis and the
collapse. And
Barack Obama looked steady,
looked sure-footed.
John McCain, the elder
statesman, the senior
guy, didn't -- wasn't -- yes, it
was his party,
and he was in a terrible bind
with George
Bush in the White House, but he
didn't look
sure.
So, I don't think that Donald
Trump, this
sort of reckless impulsiveness
is going to
wear well.
DAVID BROOKS: Well, the problem
is...
JUDY WOODRUFF: You don't? You
don't think...
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: No, I don't.
I think there will be a time. If
a question
becomes, you know, what should
the United
States do and, you know, he says
it -- tweets
at 6:00 in the morning, send the
82nd Airborne
in, there may -- I think there
is a question
of restraint and judgment and
seriousness
and maturity.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, the problem
is, this is
a binary choice. This is an
election of one
person against another.
MARK SHIELDS: I agree.
DAVID BROOKS: And so large
majorities of Americans
think that he is not honest and
trustworthy.
But the exact same percentage
think Hillary
Clinton...
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: That's true.
DAVID BROOKS: A large percentage
do not think
he shares their values. The
exact same percentage
think Hillary Clinton -- a large
-- or a significant
majority disapprove of him, but
nearly as
many disapprove of Hillary.
And in a weird -- he's going
down, but somehow
Hillary is following him
straight down. The
Hillary thing is a mystery to
me. She was
up at 66 percent approval rating
when she
was secretary of state. It
hasn't been that
long. She's just fallen in half.
And so her approval ratings have
just taken
this long, slow slide. And so
she's at parity,
basically, with him, except on
the temperament
issue, which is why she's
hitting that over
and over.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Where he is --
he's something
like 70 percent say...
DAVID BROOKS: She's at 21
percent advantage
over him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Over him on that.
MARK SHIELDS: On the secretary
of state, just
in fairness to her, when you're
secretary
of state, she had the support
and endorsement
of a lot of partisan
Republicans.
And once it became obvious she
was a presidential
candidate -- but, no, I do not
argue that
she has slipped. What we have is
two candidates
who are unpopular. Hillary
Clinton, however,
is seen as smart and experienced
and someone
who is knowledgeable. And, you
know, I think
the question on Donald Trump,
the jury is
still out on that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mean on...
MARK SHIELDS: On those
qualities. I mean,
I think they both -- they have
the liabilities
that you mentioned and David
mentioned of
trustworthiness and honesty.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But they both
have positives
as well.
But we also need to mention, of
course, that
there is still another Democrat
out there
that Hillary Clinton is running
against in
Bernie Sanders, David, who was
out this week
still saying he's in it until
the end. His
campaign put out a statement
yesterday saying
there are growing doubts about
Hillary Clinton
as the party's nominee.
Where does this Democratic race
stand? People
are -- should we be asking, is
it really over
or not?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, I think it's
over just
on the delegates.
And she has won, I don't know,
60 percent
of the votes. And she's about 9
-- on the
average of polls, she's about 9
percentage
points up in California. So,
probably, she's
going to be the nominee. Almost
certainly,
she's going to be the nominee.
But I sort of sympathize where
Sanders is,
because the Democratic
establishment is now
saying to him, you have got to
get out of
the race or you got to tone down
your rhetoric
because you're beating our
candidate.
And he can say, well, yes, I'm
beating your
candidate. So, if he keeps
winning, and so
why should he get out? Winners
don't have
to get out. They can keep going.
That's like
the rule.
And so he can -- both because
he's doing pretty
well, reasonably well, second,
because he
believes in not only his
candidacy, but his
ideas and more specifically
reforms of the
process. And so -- and, by the
way, I do not
think this is going to hurt the
Democratic
candidate in the fall.
In 2008, 60 percent of Clinton
-- only 60
percent of Clinton supporters
said they would
vote for Barack Obama. Sanders
people are
much more positively inclined
toward Clinton
than Clinton people were toward
Obama.
And by six months from now,
believe me, all
this will be forgotten, and I
think the Democratic
Party is a much more unified
party.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But is there
still -- I mean,
what do you make of the race
that's still
there between Bernie Sanders and
Hillary Clinton?
MARK SHIELDS: What I make of it
is this, Judy.
Bernie Sanders 12 months ago
launched a quixotic,
improbable campaign. He was at 3
percent in
the polls. Well-known pundits
and wise people
sneered, even snickered at his
candidacy.
She was 65 percent to 3 percent.
Over the past 12 months, Bernie
Sanders has
filled auditoriums of 27,000,
25,000, 20,000
people regularly. He has
consistently won
primaries. He's dominated the
debate. He's
raised $200 million.
There are three surviving
candidates, three.
There is only one who is
favorable in the
eyes of the voters. That's
Bernie Sanders.
There is only one who trounces
Donald Trump
by large margins. That's Bernie
Sanders.
We had four primaries in the
month of May.
He's won three of them. So the
idea -- is
there anybody on the Democratic
leadership,
in the party, or the White House
who understands
he's done so well? And you let
him get out
on his terms. He wants to make
his fight.
I agree with David. The numbers
are very much
in Secretary Clinton's, -- the
likelihood
of her being nominated is
overwhelming, but
Bernie Sanders has enlisted
millions of people.
She needs those people in the
fall, especially
young people that are -- have
been indifferent
to her candidacy.
And that's why -- of course he's
going to
make the fight and make -- carry
it through.
And he should. And they ought to
give him
some space and time and respect.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But my question
is, what happens
to all that enthusiasm that is
out there right
now for Bernie Sanders? Does it
just sort
of shift over to Hillary
Clinton? It's not
going to happen overnight,
presumably.
MARK SHIELDS: At the convention,
Bernie Sanders
stands up, and he says, this is
the fight
we have fought.
We have fought the good fight.
We have kept
the faith. We have not finished
the course,
but the rest of the course is,
we have to
stand to stop Donald Trump from
ever being
elected president. We have to
stand with Hillary
Clinton. I will do everything in
my power
over the next three months to
make sure that
Hillary Clinton is the next
president of the
United States.
DAVID BROOKS: He could tone down
some of the
rhetoric. She has not stolen the
nomination
from him.
MARK SHIELDS: No.
DAVID BROOKS: The process may
not have been
totally honest -- or not totally
fair. But
it was -- she won fair and
square.
I happen to think a lot of those
voters will
go away. I think the fall
campaign is going
to be so negative, that it will
drive down
turnout, and the sort of people
who are likely
to not -- to say just say I wash
my hands
of this are especially his young
-- Sanders'
young voters.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, we end up...
MARK SHIELDS: That's why it's
important that
they keep him in the tent, very
much in the
tent, and honor what he has
done.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we have got
a few more
weeks to watch the primaries.
They're not
over yet.
Mark Shields, David Brooks,
thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
NPR's Bob Boilen
explores the songs that have
changed musicians'
lives.
But first: President Obama
departs for a trip
to Asia tomorrow, his first
stop, Vietnam.
Mr. Obama will be the third
consecutive president
to visit the nation after
America's war there
ended in 1975. Relations between
the U.S.
and Vietnam are warming as
mutual interests
become clearer.
In a move apparently timed to
the president's
trip, Vietnam this week released
a long-held
political prisoner.
The U.S. ambassador to Vietnam
has pressed
the government there on human
rights and other
matters since he took his post.
Special correspondent Mike Cerre
sent us this
profile of the U.S.' man in
Hanoi.
MIKE CERRE: Breakfast at the
U.S. ambassador's
residence in Hanoi, with a side
order of Vietnamese
language lessons.
MD-BO-TED OSIUS, U.S.
Ambassador to Vietnam:
I can speak what is a pretty
difficult language,
and I speak it pretty well.
I think, more often than not,
people like
to get out and mix it up, really
learn what's
going on in the countries where
they serve
and make a difference.
MIKE CERRE: The closest most
locals will ever
come to a U.S. ambassador abroad
is a passing
motorcade or a heavily staged
official event.
But given the tortured relations
between the
United States and Vietnam over
the years,
U.S. Ambassador Ted Osius is
dispensing with
traditional protocols to help
create a new
reference point on U.S.-Vietnam
relations.
His mission in Vietnam started
with a 1,200-mile
bike ride, the length of the
country, as a
U.S. consular officer in 1995,
soon after
official relations between the
two countries
were restored. His bike
diplomacy continues
to be his signature style for
interacting
with the Vietnamese people, as
well as local
government officials.
While crossing the former
demilitarized zone,
once separating North from South
Vietnam,
a local woman offered a rare,
but indelible
Vietnamese perspective on what
they call here
the American war.
TED OSIUS: And I asked her, "So,
why are there
so many ponds right here?"
And she said, "Well, that's
where the Americans
dropped bombs."
And she said -- she went on to
say: "They
dropped bombs on my village.
They dropped
bombs, and I lost family
members."
And I said: "Well, I need you to
know I'm
American and I work for the U.S.
Embassy."
And she said well, "Today --
today, you and
I are brother and sister."
MIKE CERRE: Save for the war
museum, mostly
for tourists, it's almost
impossible to find
any traces or mention of the
war, let alone
get anyone wanting to talk about
it, especially
the younger Vietnamese, who have
little knowledge
of the war.
TED OSIUS: So, they have known a
lot of war.
Ours was one.
In some ways, it more seared
into our consciousness
than into theirs. Yes, it was
very painful
for both sides. Yes, they lost a
huge number
of people, but they in many ways
have been
quicker to move on and look
toward the future
than we have.
MIKE CERRE: He relies on his
Facebook page
to circumvent official channels
and the government-controlled
media to communicate as directly
as he can
with the Vietnamese people on
significant
issues, like TPP, the new
Trans-Pacific Partnership
trade agreement.
TED OSIUS: But you're not doing
this alone.
More than half of our exports to
Vietnam are
agricultural. And there will be
many more
opportunities for our exporters
to get into
this market when the Vietnamese
lower their
tariffs. The idea that jobs will
be sucked
out of the United States and
will go to Vietnam,
I don't think is correct.
MIKE CERRE: So those jobs have
already left
the United States?
TED OSIUS: We're talking about
industries
like making shoes or apparel
that involve
a lot of people, and those jobs
will shift
within this region, for the most
part.
MIKE CERRE: Also on the agenda
for the first
presidential state visit, a
broadening of
defense agreements
TED OSIUS: The Chinese have been
very aggressive,
and in some ways, they have been
pushing the
Southeast Asian countries
towards us, because
they have been so aggressive in
building islands,
in challenging the status quo in
the South
China Sea. And the United States
stands for
respect for international law.
MIKE CERRE: As much as the
Vietnam tries to
put the war behind it, a new
generation of
Vietnamese are still dealing
with some its
dangerous legacies, unexploded
ordnance, and
environmental contamination from
the Agent
Orange defoliant, suspected of
causing crippling
health issues for successive
generations of
Vietnamese.
TED OSIUS: If you're honest
about the past,
you can have a very different
kind of future
than if you try to whitewash the
past.
One is in the cleanup of dioxin,
popularly
known as Agent Orange. And we
have had some
real success in Da Nang, in
cleaning up the
dioxin that was left.
MIKE CERRE: He and the
administration are
also hoping to leverage the TPP
negotiations
to make progress on one of the
more sensitive
issues between the two
countries, human rights.
TED OSIUS: This is really
important. Yes,
I have it. I always -- I carry
this card.
It's examples of demonstrable
progress on
human rights.
I have given this card to
members of the politburo.
I point out, these are the
things that we're
asking you to do. We couldn't be
more clear.
It fits on a card. The
Vietnamese could still
choose -- rather than have
economic growth,
rather than have trade with us
in Europe,
they can choose to throw
bloggers in jail.
MIKE CERRE: For Ambassador
Osius, human rights
begins at home.
TED OSIUS: I'm white. My
husband's black.
And our kids are brown.
So, we represent, I think, one
of the things
that's really great about
America.
MIKE CERRE: Ambassador Osius
isn't the first
gay U.S. ambassador, but he and
his spouse,
Clayton Bond, have become very
visible leaders
of the LGBT movement in the
Diplomatic Corps
and now sweeping across
Southeast Asia, especially
here in Vietnam, where a ban on
same-sex marriages
was lifted shortly after they
arrived less
than two years ago.
Is this more of a personal
agenda or an official
agenda?
TED OSIUS: Well, it's about
representing equality.
And it's about representing
human rights.
And it's very much an official
agenda. The
agenda of this administration is
to keep pressing
the envelope on human rights.
And that includes
the rights of LGBTI persons.
Because my family
and I are visible, we do more by
example than
through just talking. We show
that you can
be a same-sex couple and raise
children, and
do it successfully.
NGUYEN QUI DUC, Cafe Owner: So,
anyone who
thinks that the ambassador's
sexuality is
a distraction, I think they
should come here
and see how it's been embraced
by people.
MIKE CERRE: Nguyen Qui Duc, a
former NPR and
BBC correspondent, owns a cafe
on the same
block as the ambassador's
residence, and is
a close observer of the
Vietnamese reaction
to the ambassador's diplomatic
and personal
style.
NGUYEN QUI DUC: It's a nonissue,
as long as
he does his work and carries
himself with
dignity.
TED OSIUS: The fact that I show
respect for
Vietnamese language and culture
and history,
the Vietnamese people, the fact
that I show
that respect, that I clearly
enjoy being here,
I think that has helped my
mission.
I really love being here. I feel
like I won
the lottery, because I really
care about this
country. To be able to come here
and do this
job at this time in history is a
really rare
privilege. I feel lucky every
day.
MIKE CERRE: For the "PBS
NewsHour," Mike Cerre
reporting in Hanoi, Vietnam.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight:
Many of you
may know Bob Boilen as the host
and creator
of NPR's "All Songs Considered,"
one of the
most downloaded music podcasts.
At the popular 9:30 Club here in
Washington,
D.C., recently, Jeffrey Brown
sat down with
Boilen, whose own band was the
first to play
at that club 35 years ago.
His new book, "Your Song Changed
My Life,"
recounts the history of modern
music through
voices Boilen has encountered.
JEFFREY BROWN: Your book, "Your
Song Changed
My Life," right, that's true. I
mean, a lot
of people would say that, but
why? Have you
figured out what it is that --
about music
that has that impact?
BOB BOILEN, Author, "Your Song
Changed My
Life": I think it's so visceral.
Music is so different than
everything else.
It's not tangible. You don't see
it. It hits
you on a level that is deeper
than what we
do and see in everyday life. I
think it's
pure emotion and tone, and a
lyric. Somebody
saying a lyric that repeats over
and over
can be a call to action for
somebody.
I tell stories of people whose
lives were
changed by a song, and often in
those formative
years, what some people call the
reminiscence
bump, where you're more likely
to be susceptible
to something, with hormones
raging, or the
first time you ever like heard
somebody go,
yes, you know, like, those
things are impactful
because they're firsts. And...
JEFFREY BROWN: You were looking
for those
moments from people.
BOB BOILEN: Well, then it wasn't
hard to find,
either because so many musicians
-- there
are 35 in my book, from -- you
know, you get
Jimmy Page or a new artist like
Hozier or
St. Vincent.
You get artists who became
musicians because
something like that happened to
them, where
they heard a song on the radio
while they
were 8 years old strapped to the
back seat
of a car.
Or, for Jimmy Page, he moved
into a house
that was empty and there was a
guitar in that
house, the only thing, right?
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes, with a page
of Led Zeppelin.
BOB BOILEN: Led Zeppelin, yes.
But then sees a kid at school
playing a guitar.
And this is the '50s. It's not
like today,
where everybody's got a guitar.
This was a
rare thing.
JEFFREY BROWN: It happens to all
of us, as
lovers of music, but it also
happens to the
musicians themselves. That's
what made them
who they are.
BOB BOILEN: Yes.
And those musicians go on to
spawn a whole
crop of new ones. I see it all
the time, like
someone like Courtney Barnett,
who is a musician
from Australia that many people
might not
know. She's 23 years old, one of
the best
musical poets of this
generation, I think.
I think people who love Dylan
could connect
to Courtney Barnett, for
example. She was
influenced by, you know, a band
in America
that's been a band for 20 years,
Wilco. So,
it's interesting to see someone
23 being influenced
by someone, say, in their 40s
who has been
making music since they were
that age.
So, I just love those
connections that happen.
JEFFREY BROWN: Did you see
themes emerge when
you're talking to all these
different musicians,
anything that really stood out
or surprised
you?
BOB BOILEN: Well, I think one
thing is that
parents, listen, you have a
large influence
on what your kids are going to
like.
And for my generation, I was
rebelling against
my parents' music.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
BOB BOILEN: But that's not true
anymore. Most
kids embrace their parents'
music. Most kids
look back with some sense of, I
want to know
more.
I'm curious what's going to
happen in the
land of playlists. Like, is your
kid going
to inherit your playlists? Not
likely.
JEFFREY BROWN: What is going to
happen? I
mean, because we're sitting here
talking amid
so many changes in the world of
music, right,
the industry, the way we take in
music, how
we listen to it.
BOB BOILEN: I think that we will
still have
the auditory experience.
We will still have that
experience of sitting
next to your mother or father,
hearing a song,
and -- but you're not going to
get that physical
thing that, for me, was really
important.
I mean, I miss the album. I miss
the physical
thing that I can hold and --
while I listen.
But, that said, people today
have the choice
to listen to anything and
everything. They
can listen to Louis Armstrong,
or they can
listen to, you know, Alice
Cooper, and they
can do it all in the same three
minutes of
each other without having to
purchase anything,
without having to run to the
local library
or go to somebody's cousin's
brother's house.
So, I think that's exceptional.
And so the
understanding of what music is
and its history
is much deeper than it will ever
be.
JEFFREY BROWN: And you talk
about people's
moments when they -- moments of
discovery.
What about your own?
BOB BOILEN: Well, I grew up at
the time when
the Beatles came to be, and it
may seem almost
cliche for some, oh, the
Beatles, you know?
Here's a band that in 1964 were
writing really
cute, catchy songs, and then
three, 3.5 years
later, from '64 to '67, were
writing unimaginable
sounds, with a record like "Sgt.
Pepper's
Lonely Hearts Club Band," lyrics
that were
no longer about how I love you
and how I want
to hold your hand.
It was much deeper life
philosophy. And the
orchestrations were just
mind-boggling. And
I love that progression in the
music. I love
what happens when a band can be
one thing
one time, and grow up and become
something
else. And I'm always looking for
that group
that wants to keep innovating.
I just find that fascinating,
endlessly fascinating.
JEFFREY BROWN: Sometimes,
cliches are true,
right? The Beatles.
BOB BOILEN: Yes. Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, Bob
Boilen, thanks
so much.
BOB BOILEN: Yes. Pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in other
music news, John
Berry, a founding member of the
band Beastie
Boys, died yesterday. Berry left
after their
first album, but is credited
with coming up
with the band's name. John Berry
was 52 years
old.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: Sunday
marks the birthday of Sir Arthur
Conan Doyle,
creator of Sherlock Holmes. But
the famous
author was also a physician, and
somewhat
of a medical detective in his
own right.
In his honor, we share one of
his greatest
true detective stories.
Plus, the "NewsHour" took part
in a BioBlitz
today. It's an event focuses on
finding as
many living species as possible
in a defined
area in a short period of time.
We were live on Facebook and
caught up with
National Geographic's Anand
Varma showing
off what we might be looking
over.
MAN: What have you got here?
MAN: This is a snail. And this
is actually
a kind of roach. It's related to
the cockroach
that you in your home, but it's
actually native
to the forest here. So, there's
lots of different
kinds of insects that live out
in the forest.
So, it's not just -- not just
ants and pollinators,
but -- yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very cool. All
that and more
all that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And a reminder about some
upcoming programs
from our PBS colleagues.
Tonight on "Washington Week":
Tensions escalate
in the Democratic Party, and
Donald Trump
tries to win over establishment
Republicans
by releasing his Supreme Court
short list.
Plus, President Obama extends
overtime protections
to millions of Americans. That's
later on
"Washington Week." Check your
local PBS listings.
On "PBS NewsHour" Saturday: from
discovering
your heritage to improving your
health, the
growing industry that relies on
the collection
of DNA samples.
NARRATOR: Researchers have
already gathered
blood and urine samples from
12,000 local
residents, and stored those
samples in a huge
biobank, a refrigerated
repository for human
tissue, in this case the size of
a football
field.
Then the specimen's DNA is
sequenced, as needed.
The study is ambitious,
collecting specimens
over generations, and unique, in
its focus
on one community. However, there
are ethical
concerns. Donors receive a
T-shirt and a $10
dollar Wal-Mart gift card for
their samples
and nothing more, even if their
samples help
discover a cure for cancer or
any disease.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's tomorrow
night on "PBS
NewsHour Weekend."
And we will be back right here
on Monday with
a look at those who fled Vietnam
during the
war, found a new life in the
U.S., and are
now returned home.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Have a great weekend. Thank you,
and good
night.